---
layout: page
title: "The Teaching of Orthic Shorthand, Part 1"
subtitle: "A series of lessons for the use of teachers and students of Orthographic shorthand (Callendar's system)"
author: "W. Stevens"
toc: true
toc_hmax:
---
# The Teaching of Orthic Shorthand, Part 1

A series of lessons for the use of teachers and students of Orthographic shorthand (Callendar's system)

by W. Stevens, secretary to the Cambridge Shorthand Society. 1896.

## Graciously Transcribed by Jacob Moena

This document was transcribed by Jacob Moena in September 2022. He has made available:

* The [transcription's source repository](https://github.com/jacmoe/orthic-teach-part-1)
* A clean [PDF version](https://github.com/jacmoe/orthic-teach-part-1/releases/download/v0922/OrthicTeach1.pdf)
* And even an [ePub version](https://github.com/jacmoe/orthic-teach-part-1/releases/download/v0922/OrthicTeach1.epub)

## Accompanying Readings

- [Psalms 1–20 in full style]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/reading/Orthic Psalms 1-20 (Full Style) 1896 Stevens.pdf) serves as both exercise book and exam for the completion of Lessons 1 through 3. (1896; 16 pages of shorthand)
- [Psalms 21–39 in ordinary style]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/reading/Orthic Psalms 21-39 (Ordinary Style) 1896 Stevens.pdf) serves as both exercise book and exam for Lessons 4 through 5. (1896; 16 pages of shorthand)
- [Psalms 40–65 in abbreviated style]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/reading/Orthic Psalms 40-65 (Abbreviated Style) 1896 Stevens.pdf) serves as both exercise book and exam for Lessons 6 through 8, at which point you’re expected to be writing 60 WPM and reading fluently.

## Preface

The following lessons have been drawn up for the use of teachers in the
"Orthic" system of shorthand. It should be borne in mind that shorthand
has a two-fold aspect, first, it has by signs indicating letters, to
enable a writer to take down on paper what is said; this is, by itself,
somewhat easy; but it is essential, secondly that what is put down
should be readable. Therefore teachers and students are strongly
recommended to see that the eye, the brain, and the hand are trained at
equal speed.

Reading and practice should _always_ accompany the
teaching of writing. Use the blackboard freely; use the reading books
issued with these lessons. Write sentences on the blackboard from the
books, at each lesson, and make the pupils read them. Dictate to your
class as soon as possible, and make them read aloud from the books or
magazines directly they can make out any words at all.

If teachers and
students will only follow these hints, and the lessons, as they are laid
down, not hurrying, immediate success will accrue to their efforts.

Students should practice, at least a quarter of an hour a day, what they
learned at the preceding lesson. If this is faithfully carried out, they
will be able to write at speed, and to read in an extremely short time.

_W. Stevens, Secretary of the Cambridge Shorthand Society_

## Lesson 1: Introduction to the alphabet

### Babes in Learning

Impress upon the pupils the necessity of becoming again "Babes in
Learning". They must have, as far as possible, an absolutely open mind,
and commence, as children, by learning the alphabet.

### The analogy between longhand and shorthand

Show on the blackboard the analogy between the longhand and the
shorthand character; this time at once impress it upon the memory; the
thought of the well-known longhand character will necessarily carry with
it its analogue, the shorthand symbol, thus

![](img/fig1-1.png) ![](img/fig1-2.png)

Add the two distinct forms ![](img/fig1-3.png), and ![](img/fig1-4.png)
ing.

### The alphabet

Now write the alphabet, between lines, on the board.

![](img/fig1-5.png)

### All vowels are straight-on written strokes

Point out that all vowels are _straight-on written strokes_, and
that, conversely, all straight-on written strokes are vowels, thus
![](img/fig1-6.png) *A*, ![](img/fig1-7.png) *E*, ![](img/fig1-8.png)
*I*, ![](img/fig1-9.png) *O*, ![](img/fig1-10.png) *U*
(![](img/fig1-11.png) is written at an angle of 30 degrees with the
line.)

### The size and shape of the characters

Very particularly differentiate between the sizes of the characters, the
larger to be three times the size of the smaller. Show the geometric
nature of analogous letter, as ![](img/fig1-12.png).

### Analogous characters

Give the following aids to memory: analogous characters
![](img/fig1-13.png), as in longhand, small c, large C, adding loops =
![](img/fig1-14.png). ![](img/fig1-15.png), *O* = long *A*. *T*, *D*,
analogous, analogous sounds and shapes; also *M*, *N*;
![](img/fig1-16.png), *S*, down stroke, has its larger analogue in
![](img/fig1-17.png) *P*; ![](img/fig1-18.png) *Y* in
!_](img/fig1-19.png) ing. ![](img/fig1-20.png) [above_ line is *J*
!_](img/fig1-21.png) [below_ line; ![](img/fig1-22.png) *F*,
![](img/fig1-23.png) *K*; are analogous; ![](img/fig1-24.png) *Q*, and
![](img/fig1-25.png) *V* also, the one top-joined, the other open.

### The circles

The chief difficulty lies in remembering the circles; try the following
aids:

\(a\) Analogy with the longhand *H*, *L*, *R*.

\(b\) ![](img/fig1-26.png) *H* has its diminutive analogue in
!_](img/fig1-27.png) *R*, both lie at the [top_ of a following
line; ![](img/fig1-28.png) *ch* and ![](img/fig1-29.png) *L* are
similar, and lie at the _bottom_ of a line.

\(c\) *R* turns against the clock, from Right to Left; *L* turns with
the clock from Left to Right; or, *R* lies ove _r_ a following
line, *L* be _l_ ow it.

### Conclusion - read and write any letter

Let the pupils practice these alphabet forms until they can write
instantly any letter called for, and can accurately give the relative
signs. Be sure and let the students _read_ from the blackboard any
character you write, as well as themselves writing any letter you
dictate.

## Lesson 2: Joinings - Vowels

### Combined vowels

The alphabet being truly known, commence joinings; start with combined
vowels; then make the pupils join every letter of the alphabet to
preceding and following vowel, and combined vowels, pointing out any
difficulties.

### Ae, ea, ai, ia

Combined vowels are *ai*, *ay*, *ea*, *ee*, etc. Note that characters,
whether vowels or consonants, are duplicated by placing a dot under the
letter, thus ![](img/fig2-1.png) = *aa* as ![](img/fig2-2.png) *Baal*;
![](img/fig2-9.png) = *oo*, ![](img/fig2-3.png) *foot*. The distinction
between *E* and *I* is that, when necessary, the *I* is dotted as in
long hand. Therefore, in doubling *E* or *I*, [do not dot, but
lengthen]{.ul}, thus ![](img/fig2-4.png) *ee*, ![](img/fig2-5.png) *ei*,
as ![](img/fig2-6.png) *reed*, ![](img/fig2-7.png) *reid*.

*Ae*, *ai*, *ea*, and *ia* are formed of the letters
![](img/fig2-8.png); now in rapid writing it would be almost impossible
to preserve the angle, hence we draw a rule, (the problem being to get
from ![](img/fig2-10.png) as quickly and easily as possible), eliminate
the angle, and thus make an on-written oblique curve,
![](img/fig2-11.png) *ai*, ![](img/fig2-12.png) *ae*, or *ea*. The
curves may be written either way ![](img/fig2-13.png) as most
convenient, having regard to the preceding or following consonant;
_except that_ the combined vowels *ai* must always be written in
the order of the letters *a* *i*. Examples, ![](img/fig2-14.png) *dear*,
this is better than writing ![](img/fig2-15.png), which in very rapid
writing might become ![](img/fig2-16.png) *demr*. ![](img/fig2-17.png)
*fear*, ![](img/fig2-18.png) *year*, ![](img/fig2-19.png) *Ealing*,
![](img/fig2-20.png) *meal*. But *ai* must be written *a* *i*, as
![](img/fig2-21.png) *mail*. For aid in reading it is better to dot the
*i*.

### ay

The same reasoning applies to *ay*, ![](img/fig2-22.png), eliminate the
angle, and make an on-written oblique curve, ![](img/fig2-23.png) or
![](img/fig2-24.png). Observe particularly that *e* and *i* being
_up]{.ul} strokes, the curve will [rise]{.ul}; *y* being a [down_
stroke, the curve will _fall_. As ![](img/fig2-25.png) *day*, the
![](img/fig2-26.png) curve is better than ![](img/fig2-27.png),
![](img/fig2-28.png) which might become ![](img/fig2-29.png) *dm*, or
*dmy*, ![](img/fig2-30.png) *may*. See Manual P. 6. A.

### Other combined vowels

Other combined vowels are treated similarly, as *au*
![](img/fig2-31.png), *ou* ![](img/fig2-32.png), a short line slur and a
long line slur; ![](img/fig2-33.png) *ua*; ![](img/fig2-34.png) *eu*
![](img/fig2-35.png) *eau*, etc. *Oa* and *ao* are shown by writing, if
necessary, the *A* above the *O*, thus ![](img/fig2-36.png) *oar*,
![](img/fig2-37.png) *Laon*.

### The diphthong rule

We now draw this rule, "all on-written oblique curves are combined
vowels, or diphthongs", conversely, " all diphthongs are on-written
oblique curves".

### The y upstroke rule

An upstroke vowel following or preceding *y* is written with an angle
![](img/fig2-38.png) *ye*, ![](img/fig2-39.png) *obey*.

### Conclusion - observe students

Examine pupils thoroughly in this lesson.

## Lesson 3: Joinings - Consonants

### L and R

Continue the combination of letters as given in the manual, pointing out
the following: ![](img/fig3-1.png) *bl*, ![](img/fig3-2.png) *br*, the
*L* lies at the bottom or _left_ side of the upright character, and
the *R* at the top or _right_ side; similarly ![](img/fig3-3.png)
*pl*, ![](img/fig3-4.png) *pr*; ![](img/fig3-5.png) *fl*,
![](img/fig3-6.png) *fr*, ![](img/fig3-7.png) *ml*, ![](img/fig3-8.png)
*mr*.

Note that it is usual to mite a vowel following *R* attached to an
upright letter _from the top_, as in ![](img/fig3-9.png) *pra*,
this is to save time, and to avoid going round the circle twice.

### Ch and H

Compare *Ch* and *H*, these are analogous to *L* and *R*, *Ch* is
written like longhand *O*, that is, it begins and ends at the top, and
consequently, like *L*, lies _under_ the following vowel, as
![](img/fig3-10.png) *cho*; *H*, on the other hand, begins and ends at
the _bottom]{.ul}, and consequently, like *R*, lies at the [top_ of
a following vowel, at ![](img/fig3-11.png) *ha*.

In the combinations *chl*, *chr*, put the *L* or *R* inside the larger
circle, thus ![](img/fig3-12.png) *chlo*, (observe the *L* lies below
the vowel line) ![](img/fig3-13.png) *chro*, here the *R* lies above the
line; compare *Phl*, *Phr*, Manual p. 10.

### S after F or K

*S* joined to the finish of *F* or *K* is better, (as the hand is
traveling in a curve), turned _up_ rather than down; thus
![](img/fig3-14.png) *ks* is better than ![](img/fig3-15.png).

### H and its connections

*H* has, in English, the following consonants preceding it: *C*, *G*,
*P*, *R*, *S*, *T*, and *W*. *Ch* has been explained; *gh* is written in
order, ![](img/fig3-16.png); *ph* also, ![](img/fig3-17.png) or
![](img/fig3-18.png) according to the next letter, thus
![](img/fig3-19.png) *phar*, ![](img/fig3-20.png) *phy*. *Rh*, the *R*
can lie just outside, or curl within, the *H* circle, as
![](img/fig3-21.png) or ![](img/fig3-22.png); *Sh*, following our
alphabet analogy, is written three times as small as
![](img/fig3-23.png) *ph*, thus ![](img/fig3-24.png).

If the combination *Shr* is desired, it is shown by continuing the next
letter from the _bottom_, instead of the top of the circle, as
![](img/fig3-25.png) = *shro*, but ![](img/fig3-26.png) = *sho*. *Th* is
written in order ![](img/fig3-27.png). *Wh* is made like *Ch*, but is
not joined at the top, thus ![](img/fig3-28.png) = *who*. It may also be
remembered thus, enlarge the *W* X to look like *H* X.

### Q

*Q* = *qu*; as there is no word in the English language commencing with
*q* that is not followed by the letter *U*, it is reasonable to allow
![](img/fig3-29.png) to stand for *qu*.

### S before and after P

*S* before and after *P* should be rounded. ![](img/fig3-30.png) *sp*,
![](img/fig3-31.png) *ps*, ![](img/fig3-32.png) *sps*.

### W

The letter *W* has a two-fold symbol ![](img/fig3-33.png), the first
initial, the second final. Observe the longhand character in Lesson 1,
students will then never forget which is which, or the direction they
turn. Initial *W* ![](img/fig3-34.png) is always used at the beginning
of a word, _except before R_. (*Wh* we have already explained)
Before *R* _final W ![](img/fig3-35.png) is used_, thus
![](img/fig3-36.png), the reasoning that written the other way
![](img/fig3-37.png), the combination really becomes *wer*, not *wr*
only. Note that *W* !_](img/fig3-38.png) begins [on_ the line, not
above it as ![](img/fig3-39.png) = *t*.

Another way to remember *W* is to point out that whether initial or
final, _it is an upward tick_, as ![](img/fig3-40.png) *wo*,
![](img/fig3-41.png) *ow*. The letter may be written either circularly
or angularly as ![](img/fig3-42.png) or ![](img/fig3-43.png) *owing*,
![](img/fig3-44.png) or ![](img/fig3-45.png).

The angular form is used after *S*, thus ![](img/fig3-46.png) *sw*,
formed of ![](img/fig3-47.png) *s* and ![](img/fig3-48.png) *w*. To add
*S* to final *W*, elongate the loop, thus ![](img/fig3-49.png) *cow*,
![](img/fig3-50.png) *cows*.

### X

*X* is made up, as in longhand, of *C* and *S*, ![](img/fig3-51.png),
and there is no English word beginning with *X* that is not preceded by
*E*, this character may be used to represent *Ex*. There is no need to
make an angle in the combinations *Exh*, *Exch*, as
![](img/fig3-52.png).

### Conclusion - read and write sentences from blackboard

Now let the students write simple sentences and read from the
blackboard.

## Lesson 4: Basic abbreviation

### Lesson prerequisites

The students should now be able to write any dictation in full style,
and to read the first exercise book of the Psalms. The progress of the
writing and reading should be simultaneous.

It is a prudent course to dictate a Psalm, and let the students correct
from the printed exercise. Lesson 4 should not be given until this
result is attained.

### First abbreviation rules

Being now able to read and write in full style, the rules for first
abbreviations may be given.

They are

#### (a) Leave out a and o before m and n

Always leave out *a* and *o* before *m* and *n*; where there are double
*a's* or *o's* leave out one, thus ![](img/fig4-1.png) *command*,
![](img/fig4-2.png) *son*, but ![](img/fig4-3.png) *soon*.

#### (b) No need to dot the i

There is no need to dot the *i* in simple words, ![](img/fig4-4.png)
*it*.

#### (c) Initial Th is omitted

_Initial_ *Th* is omitted, and the rest of the word written
_above_ the line, thus ![](img/fig4-5.png) = *the*. Why? Because
were the *Th* written, the succeeding letter would come as placed, above
the line. E.g. ![](img/fig4-6.png), delete the *Th*,
![](img/fig4-7.png). What is left and where ![](img/fig4-8.png), hence
the rule. *Th* in any other part of the word is written, except in the
compound word "although", which is written ![](img/fig4-9.png). The only
case of a word written above the line and not presupposing initial *Th*
is the word "and" signified by ![](img/fig4-10.png) *a*, written above
the line.

#### (d) Inflections with y retain the y

In adding inflections *y* retain the *y*, thus "tries" is spelt "trys",
"applied" "applyd", etc.

### Common terminations

Common terminations should be abbreviated as follows, after the ordinary
longhand abbreviation, or a logically scientific rule.

#### -ed

leave out the *e*; as used = us'd ![](img/fig4-11.png).

#### -ful

leave out the *u*; ![](img/fig4-12.png) *useful*, ![](img/fig4-13.png);
this last example, *beautiful*, shows one reason for retaining the *y*
in the inflected word, "beautyfull".

#### -hood / --head

*hd* only; ![](img/fig4-14.png).

#### -ight

*t* !_](img/fig4-15.png) [below_ the line. But surely this is an
arbitrary rule? No. Follow the writing in *light*, *sight*, *bright*,
*frighten*, etc., ![](img/fig4-16.png); now erase the *'igh'*,
![](img/fig4-17.png); what is left and where? Why ![](img/fig4-18.png);
hence the rule. It is better to show the vowel after *l* and *r*, so as
to show which consonat it is by the way it is turned, as
![](img/fig4-19.png).

#### -ion

this termination is shown by ![](img/fig4-20.png) = *ion*;
![](img/fig4-21.png).

#### -ation

is a common ending, and it is wise to shorten it as much as possible,
therefore use detached *n* ![](img/fig4-22.png) to represent this
termination, as ![](img/fig4-23.png).

#### -ity / -ly

*-ity* = *y* _above_ the last letter

*-ly* = *y* _below_ last letter

Why? because the would be there if the whole word was written; thus
![](img/fig4-24.png), erase *'it'* and *'l'*, and we get
![](img/fig4-25.png).

#### -less

![](img/fig4-26.png) *ls*, as in longhand.

#### -ness

*es*, ![](img/fig4-27.png).

#### -ment

*mt* ![](img/fig4-28.png).

#### -ough

this ending, as is well known, has many ways of being pronounced, but
for the sake of simplicity and uniformity we take the common *"tho"* as
equivalent for *"though"*. Hence *o* ![](img/fig4-29.png) = *ough*; so
we get ![](img/fig4-30.png) as representing *ought*, *thought*.

#### -ther

slur the *t* ![](img/fig4-31.png) into the *h* ![](img/fig4-32.png)
circle and put the *r* inside, thus ![](img/fig4-33.png),
![](img/fig4-34.png) *other*.

#### -ward

leave out the *w*, as a seaman say *for'ard* for *forward*,
![](img/fig4-35.png).

### Conclusion - General abbreviation rule

Let these rules be thoroughly learned and practiced. Simply, at this
lesson, lay down this further rule:

In abbreviating words it is usual to follow the longhand method of
writing the first syllable, or distinctive feature of the word, and add
the ending, detached or joined as may be the most convenient for future
reading.

## Lesson 5: Common abbreviations

### Introduction

Now teach the abbreviations given on page 18 of the Manual. These are
common words. Show that the abbreviation here used is in accord with the
generally accepted longhand abbreviation.

### Ever

Draw attention to ![](img/fig5-1.png) = *ever* : this appears an
arbitrary; it is not; students will see the logic at the next lesson.

### ou for ound or ount

Show the importance of ![](img/fig5-2.png) *ou* standing for *ound* or
*ount*. Emphasize this by such words as ![](img/fig5-3.png) *pound*,
![](img/fig5-4.png) *sound*, ![](img/fig5-5.png) *count*; hence
![](img/fig5-6.png) *counter*, ![](img/fig5-7.png) *county*,
![](img/fig5-8.png) *country*.

### Common words

Add the following common words:

![](img/fig5-9.png) *aso* = *also*, ![](img/fig5-10.png) *ea* = *each*,
![](img/fig5-11.png) *ay* = *any*. ![](img/fig5-12.png) is *because*,
therefore ![](img/fig5-13.png) = *cause*. ![](img/fig5-14.png) being
*child*, ![](img/fig5-15.png) = *children*. ![](img/fig5-16.png) =
*from*, show clearly that ![](img/fig5-17.png) being *for*,
!_](img/fig5-18.png) is [form_, not *from*. ![](img/fig5-19.png) =
*great*, ![](img/fig5-20.png) = *much* (*ch* curled inside),
![](img/fig5-21.png) = *that* (*th* left out and *t* written above the
line), ![](img/fig5-22.png) = *already*, ![](img/fig5-23.png) = *acing*
= *according*, ![](img/fig5-24.png) = *after*, ![](img/fig5-25.png) =
*bth* = *both*, ![](img/fig5-26.png) *el* = *else*, ![](img/fig5-27.png)
*e'en* = *even*, ![](img/fig5-28.png) = *except*, ![](img/fig5-29.png)
*lp* = *help*, ![](img/fig5-30.png) *kn* = *know*, ![](img/fig5-31.png)
*lile* = *little*, ![](img/fig5-32.png) *ler* = *letter*,
![](img/fig5-33.png) *pt* = *part*, ![](img/fig5-34.png) *s* = *sir*,
![](img/fig5-35.png) *rk* = *work*, ![](img/fig5-36.png) = *word*,
![](img/fig5-37.png) = both *would* and *world*.

### Conclusion

Point out that words similar to those given above can be treated in the
same way as *such* like *much*; *party* ![](img/fig5-38.png), etc.

## Lesson 6: Introduction to modes, first mode

### Lesson prerequisites

This lesson should not be attempted until the preceding ones are
thoroughly known and the students can write fairly quickly in the style
abbreviated up to this point; and, further, can read the second *Book of
the Psalms* which is written in this abbreviated form.

### Lesson overview

This being accomplished, the teacher can take the pupils on to supra and
sub linear writing as detailed in this lesson.

### The modes

There are three _modes]{.ul} of writing a word, either 1. [above_,
2. _on]{.ul}, or 3. [below_ the line.

### Th, vowel V vowel (Eve)

We have explained one example of writing _above_ the line, in the
case of initial *Th*, see Lesson 4. It is however possible to use this
method in other cases without running any risk of clashing, while it is
clear that the use of mode writing is a great saving in time.

#### Th

Use mode 1 _only when initial_, except in the case of the word
*although* ![](img/fig6-1.png)

#### Eve (vowel V vowel)

It is clear that the shorthand characters *eve* ![](img/fig6-2.png) must
throw everything following the final *e* above the line, and it is also
evident that such words cannot clash with that peculiarity of the
English language *Th*, except in the words *even* and *then*, which has
been provided for above.

Therefore apply the rule *Mode 1*, and _wherever_ *vowel v vowel*
come, _in any part of a word_, leave them out, and write the rest
of the word _above_ the line, just where it would have come had the
whole word been written. E.g. ![](img/fig6-3.png) = ![](img/fig6-4.png)
*given*, ![](img/fig6-5.png) *loved*. N.B. It is better to write the
vowel after *l* and *r* for reasons similar to those given in Lesson 4,
to show the direction in which the consonants are turned.
![](img/fig6-6.png) = *evident*, ![](img/fig6-7.png) = *conceived*,
![](img/fig6-8.png) = *ever*. See paragraph 2, Lesson 4.

But how about a word ending in *ave*, *ove*, etc. only? What is Euclid's
definition of the end of straight lines? A point, is it not? Shorthand
*e* ![](img/fig6-9.png) is a straight line; the end of that straight
line ![](img/fig6-9.png) is a point; therefore write the point. Thus
![](img/fig6-10.png) *give*, ![](img/fig6-11.png) *love*,
![](img/fig6-12.png) *rove*.

### Be

As there is a very close relation between *V* and *B*, and as words with
the prefix "be" belong to a special English class, we may without fear
use *Mode 1* to indicate the _prefix_ "Be". This abbreviation is
only to be used when "be" is a distinct prefix, as ![](img/fig6-13.png)
= *behold*; it would be incorrect to write ![](img/fig6-14.png) for
*bead*, this would be *Be-ad*, not *bead*. By the same reasoning as the
_dot_ indicating *vowel-v-vowel* so the verb "be" may be shown by a
dot; thus ![](img/fig6-15.png); the only liberty taken in using this
prefix "be" is in the common words _been]{.ul}, [better_,
_best]{.ul}, and [by_ which are written ![](img/fig6-16.png),
respectively.

![](img/fig6-17.png) = *bring*, compare crooked *ing*
![](img/fig6-18.png) for *thing*.

### Per pre pri pro and peri para

As stated, supra linear writing is very useful for rapidity, and if
other prefixes can be found that cannot possibly clash with the rules
laid down, they may with advantage be safely indicated by this mode.
Such are found in words derived from the Latin and Greek languages. We
thus get the prefixes *per*, *pre*, *pri*, and *pro* from the Latin, and
*peri* and *para* from the Greek; all of which may be expressed by *Mode
1*.

### Lesson conclusion

See that the pupils thoroughly appreciate the supra-linear writing; the
gain in time; no clashing possible. Thoroughly understand *th*, *be*,
*per*, *pre*, *pri*, *pro*, *peri*, *para* are indicated only when
initial, prefixes, or quasi-prefixes. Vowel *ve* can be indicated in any
position in the word.

## Lesson 7: Second and third modes

### Introduction

Today we take the second and third modes of contraction, that is,
_on]{.ul} the line, and [below_ the line.

### On the line

The common primitive *con* or *com* may be expressed by a _dot_
_on_ the line, or by leaving it out altogether, and writing the
rest of the word quite close to the preceeding word, as
![](img/fig7-1.png), ![](img/fig7-2.png), or ![](img/fig7-3.png) = *I
commend*.

For other abbreviations by this mode, it is only necessary to use the
accepted longhand style, and to follow the rule laid down in the Manual
of writing the important part of the word, and the termination, e.g.
![](img/fig7-4.png) = *different*, ![](img/fig7-5.png) *difference*,
![](img/fig7-6.png) *ultimo*, ![](img/fig7-7.png) *interest*, and so on.

In words having the combination *dj* leave out the *d*, in *tch* leave
out the *t*.

### Below the line

Sub linear writing is writing _below_ the line. We have already had
an example of this, with the reason, in ![](img/fig7-8.png) = *ight*.
From this we can easily draw another rule - in the combination *dge*,
*age*, *gn*, or *gram* it is clear that equally as in the case of
"ight", the *g*, as part of the termination or syllable, throws the rest
of the word _below_ the line, e.g. ![](img/fig7-9.png) = *for gn* =
*foreign*, ![](img/fig7-10.png) *age*, ![](img/fig7-11.png) *magnify*,
etc.

The only other cases of sub-linear writing up to this point are the
words 'take' and 'sake' and their inflections, which are written
!_](img/fig7-12.png), etc. The *k* throws [below_ the line, but in
no other case is the *k* so treated.

## Lesson 8: Slurs

### Slurs mb dv

We have now to study the "slurs" commonly used. Notice the combination
![](img/fig8-1.png) *mb*, if we can get an outline that will embrace
both these, preserving the character of the outline - the greater you
know will always include the less, this axiom is the basis for the
common slurs - time will be saved. We thus get a character like this
![](img/fig8-2.png) = ![](img/fig8-3.png), and this outline does stand
for *mb*, as ![](img/fig8-4.png) = *member*. This character has too its
analogue _below_ the line; look at ![](img/fig8-5.png), one outline
![](img/fig8-6.png) will embrace both.

So we get these aids to writing ![](img/fig8-7.png) for the combination
*mb*, ![](img/fig8-8.png) for *dv*.

### Slurs mm/mn, dd, dt, and td

Again, *mm* or *mn* often come together when by the rule the vowel is
left out, as in the word *man*, ![](img/fig8-9.png), now one large curve
will embrace both ![](img/fig8-10.png).

Similarly *dd*, *dt*, or *td* may be represented by a large
![](img/fig8-11.png).

### T slur rule for count, country, duty

We have seen that as ![](img/fig8-12.png) = *count*, therefore
![](img/fig8-13.png) = *county*, we therefore extract a rule *t* may be
slurred in such words as *duty*, *bounty*, etc.

### L slurred with T in wealth, health

*L* may be slurred with the *t* in such words as *wealth*, *health*,
etc., and the softly sounding vowel in terminations such as "al",
*final* ![](img/fig8-14.png), "er" in *upper* ![](img/fig8-15.png), etc.

## Lesson 9: Conclusion

### Where the student is now

The pupils should with their present knowledge be able to write in
*supplement style*, at least 60 words per minute, and to read fluently
the *Third Book of the Psalms*, and the *Magazine*, and to correspond
rapidly with any member of the *Cambridge Shorthand Society*.

### What to do in this lesson

The only thing to be done on this concluding lesson is to draw the
students attention to the list of recognized contractions as issued by
the Society, to assist them in phrasing and to consider a few general
terminations.

### Two rules for speed and perfection

The two following rules should suffice to enable any student to acquire
such perfection and speed that he is then able to study the suggestions
given elsewhere for reporting.

#### First rule

The first rule applies to phrasing, and it is, "words that are closely
connected in sense may generally be joined together, and sometimes
slurred.

Examples: ![](img/fig9-1.png) = *I should have been*,
![](img/fig9-2.png) = *with a view to*, ![](img/fig9-3.png) = *able to
do so*, ![](img/fig9-4.png) = *as soon as*, etc.

#### Second rule

The last rule is an important one and should be thoughtfully remembered.
"Never try to contract if it is easier to write in full or if it
produces hesitation."

### Common terminations and how to deal with them

Common terminations such as *ent*, *ency*, *ence*, *graph*, *ism*,
*ship*, *mise* can be easily written shortly by using only the last
letter or two, as *t*, *cy*, *ce*, *ph*, *m*, *p*, *se*.

### Use The Teacher with Manual and Supplement

The "Teacher" should be used in conjunction with the Manual and
Supplement; these books will fill in detail the hints here given.

### How to use The Teacher for teaching

Teachers of Orthic will use their discretion as to the dovetailing of
these lessons according to the class and progress of their students;
make them read equally with their writing; don't let them worry about
trifles, for there should be no conscious thought, for this produces
hesitation and loss in time.

### The importance of dictation

Begin to dictate not later than at Lesson 3, and make your dictation
applicable to your lesson. In transcribing make a judicious use of the
context.
